- [Ian] Clay is the
perfect material, really.
- [Sean] If you think
about Grommet, you know,
all the emotion in that face comes
from a movement of the brow.
- Wallace is is kind of classic.
- Cheese.
- Clay underpins really who
we are and what we're about.
Aardman started with "Chicken Run,"
we're about to release our 11th movie
- [Ian] You need this
very specific particular
type of clay to be able to do what we do.
- [Kate] Well for many years,
Aardman has used a type of clay
manufactured by a company called Newplast.
- I think we used that over 25 years,
that was the only company doing it.
- The founders of Newplast
had decided, rightly so,
they wanted to retire and move on.
- [Ian] You sort of suddenly realized,
well there's no other product out there.
So then you did start to
wonder, well, what will happen
when we sort of finally use
up everything we've got here.
- We've got loads of clay
here, we've got so much now,
is I've got so many hidey holes of clay,
so I've got about three or
four rooms of shelves full
of clay actually, and
this is a terracotta,
which actually famously we use for Morph.
- [Ian] We don't have any wax in our clay.
A lot of time it like the
wax, especially in the heat
and the lights, it will melt
and it will go soft and it will droop.
We can't have like a grommet
or Morph just suddenly
collapsing over several hours.
- It's incredibly important
that we get the clay right
because it can really slow down animation.
So one day I'd got an email from our CEO,
which I thought was a bit unusual
and essentially he was
messaging me to say, did I know
that Newplast that the company
was in danger of closing down.
I was in shock a bit, really.
- It took me a bit by surprise
in how quickly it became a
story all over the world.
- [Reporter] Aardman Animations,
the legendary stop motion studio
is apparently out of clay.
- [Reporter 2] Creators
of Wallace and Grommet
are headed for disaster.
- It's funny as well because I remember
my father-in-law even he
looked horrified asking
me, what are you gonna do?
You're not gonna be able to work.
- My first thought was, what
stock have we got in house
for Wallace and Grommet?
- I always keep a certain amount of stock
anyway, we were never gonna run out,
well not for years.
- So I knew it wasn't a problem,
although at some point
clearly it was gonna
become a problem.
- Luckily we had just made
a big order from Newplast
and so we thought, okay,
right, we know we are all right
for this project.
We started scouring the kind of shops
and warehouses just to kind
of add to the stockpile.
We decided right, okay, we are
going to at least have a try.
Can we mix clay ourselves?
- In charge of producing
most of the clay we do here
and matching color.
Out and in, out and in.
So that can go on for hours and hours.
So that can be quite demanding.
But it's quite nice to
see like the color you,
you get your white, you
get your, your reds,
you get your pinks and
maybe a bit of yellow
and then you know, you put it all together
and within a few hours you've got Wallace.
It's quite satisfying to see actually.
You wanna want to kind of like,
the test is normally
just to kind of see like,
does it stick to itself?
Like you gotta play it by ear.
That's why it's really hard.
It's no set rules really.
You've just, a lot of it's by feel.
I've been doing it so long
now, I'll know like, right,
this is, well this is too soft.
This will need five, six, 7% chalk.
- Eventually we did make something,
which I would say it definitely was clay.
We thought, well we don't really
want to go into production
because that's not what we do.
You know, we make puppets and we animate.
- This is Feathers.
Originally we had a
clay glove on his head.
Now this is actually
silicon just for ease.
- Good grief.
- [Ian] All the black part of him is clay.
This is a solid chest and
then he's got rubber legs
and a solid beak and a
couple of glass pinheads
that go in for his eyes.
When you're animating him,
you're just moving it
obviously bit by bit,
but you can see up here, it all starts
to crack as soon as you've moved it.
I would be constantly going in
and kind of smoothing this area down
to get it back into shape.
- But you are supposed to be locked up.
- We do think of ourselves as
performers, much like actors.
You can get really nuanced performance
and you have a way bigger
range of subtlety using clay.
- We aren't actually
using enormous quantities
of clay these days.
Maybe at the beginning of a
feature film we will buy like 30
to 40 kilos, which doesn't
really sound that much,
but we try to kind of
be fairly conservative
with the way we use it and
not waste a load of it.
- I mean we've still got a hundred
or so several hundred boxes now,
so we're still good now really actually.
- And then Hue came along.
They do a lot of packages
and, and products for schools
and for students and
decided to buy Newplast.
- Suddenly it felt like there
was this lifeline out there
for this very specific,
particular type of clay.
- We were very relieved.
- There was a period where
we were really smoothing
everything down, but we found it was kind
of smoothing all the work out of it
and all the life out of it.
So over the recent years,
we've really made a conscious effort to
put back in those fingerprints
because obviously isn't
an unanimous character.
It's funny how you can just by touching it
and moving it, it's not breathing
but it's, it's kind of living.
- It's all about the soul,
about the human input
and I really don't understand
why you would want to kind
of have a machine to do that.
There's always going to
be something lacking that
to me it can only ever just be okay.
- I think clay is a medium
that's defined a studio.
You know, we're in our 50th year,
we are the best in the world at it
and we'll be using it
for the next 50 years.